Session3 README (#1)
uclaacm/hackschool-f20: session-3-dom-api/README.md

  + [Manipulating the elements](#manipulating-the-elements)
  + [A little detour: how are colors represented in a computer?](#a-little-detour-how-are-colors-represented-in-a-computer)
  + [Scheduling for things to happen](#scheduling-for-things-to-happen)
  + [Listening and reacting to events](#listening-and-reacting-to-events)
+ [Summary](#summary)
+ [⚡️ Challenges](#️-challenges)

Today we will base our workshop off some starter code in
[demo-starter](/demo-starter). If you would like to follow along, [download
the file](/demo-starter.zip)! It has a HTML and a CSS file. If you open the HTML file in the
browser, it looks like this:

<div align=center>
    <img alt="rendered starter HTML" src="images/starter-html.png" width="500px">
</div>

## Linking JavaScript to HTML

Last time, we had SO MUCH FUN coding in JavaScript in the console. But once
you close the browser window, it is gone forever (like my ex. who am I
kidding... I don't have one). So you would have to type it in the console
again. Frustrating... no... actually we don't need to.

Let's create a JavaScript file and name it `script.js`. Inside, we will put a
line of simple JavaScript:

> 

Author: add an explanation that the script file should be in the same directory as the HTML and CSS files

```js
console.log("If you see this in browser, that means our script is running.");
```

To use this JavaScript code file in our webpage, we need to link it to our 

> HTML. Here we introduce a new HTML tag called `<script>`:

Reviewer: ...Here, we introduce...

```html
<body>
  <div id="clock-face">0:00:01 AM</div> 
  <div class="btn-container">
    <button class="btn">Press</button>
  </div>
  <!-- We add the following line -->
  <script src="script.js"></script>
</body>
```

Now, if you open the HTML `index.html` in your browser and launch the
console, you will see our `console.log` is executed. That means we have
linked our JavaScript file to the HTML successfully.

> 🚩 Checkpoint: Link the JavaScript file and see the `console.log` output in
the console.

## What is the DOM?

DOM stands for **Document Object Model**. It is a programming model that
represents documents as objects. In our case, our document is the HTML
document. The object here refers to the JavaScript object that we learned
last time.

This means that we can store our HTML elements (each tag is an element) as a

> variable in JavaScript and manipulate it as an object.

Reviewer: we can store HTML elements as variables in JavaScript and manipulate them as objects, or
we can store an HTML element as a variable in JavaScript and manipulate it as an object

Still sounds very vague right? Let's put this in concrete code. The DOM means
that the browser defines a `document` object for you. You can print it out 
in the console:

```js
console.log(document);
```

This `document` object in facts represents the entire webpage itself as an
object. This is not that useful though, since we want to access the
individual elements.

### Accessing individual elements

"Access" means "getting hold of something", "get a reference of something",

> or "store something as a variable".

Author: ```suggestion
"Access" means "getting hold of something", "getting a reference to something",
or "storing something as a variable".
```

Reviewer 2: The idiom is "getting ***a*** hold of something"

Also what's a reference? I think this explanation is vaguer than the word access.

`document` refers to the entire webpage. To access certain elements within
the webpage, the `document` object provides a convenient method for us to
use. It is called `querySelector`. It takes in a string as the input
parameter. In your console, run:

```js
console.log(document.querySelector("button"));
```

Since our webpage contains a button, `document.querySelector("button")`
returns an object representing that button. What is the string that we 

> pass in to `querySelector`? It is actually CSS selector. Recall from last time, we learned three ways to select elements in CSS:

Author: ```suggestion
pass into `querySelector`? It is actually a CSS selector. Recall from last time, we learned three ways to select elements in CSS:
```

```css
/* with tag name */
button {
    color: blue;
}

> /* with id */ 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

/* with an ID */
```

#clock-face {
    font-size: 7em;
}

> /* with class name */

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
/* with the name of a class */
```

.btn-container {
    margin-top: 48px;
}
```

These three ways work for `querySelector` as well. For instance, to select
our clock face in the webpage, we pass in its ID `clock-face` with a hash
`#`:

```js
const myClockFace = document.querySelector("#clock-face");
```

To select the button, we use its class name `btn` with a dot `.`:

```js
const myButton = document.querySelector(".btn");
```

To select the body tag, we pass the tag in directly:

```js
const body = document.querySelector("body");
```

To see it for yourself, print them inside the `script.js` file!

```js
const myClockFace = document.querySelector("#clock-face");
const myButton = document.querySelector(".btn");
const body = document.querySelector("body");

console.log("Here is the clock face element:");
console.log(myClockFace);
console.log("Here is the button element:");
console.log(myButton);
```

> 🚩 Checkpoint: You should be able to see your button and clock face element

> being outputted in the console.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> being printed in the console.
```

> 🧠 Big Brain Time: What happens if multiple elements match the selector?
> 
> <details>
> <summary>Answer</summary>
> 
> `querySelector` only returns the first one. To get access to all matches,
> use [`document.querySelectorAll`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Document/querySelectorAll).
> 
> </details>

> <br>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

### Manipulating the elements

> Just accessing the elements is no fun. With the elements represented as
> objects, we can manipulate them. We can change their style, content, and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Just accessing the elements is no fun. With elements stored in variables, we will
be able to _manipulate_ them. We can change their style, content, and
```

force them into an existential crisis by deleting them (we are not gonna
teach you the last one unfortunately).

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

We can change the content of an element:

```js
// inside script.js, after your "querySelector"s

> myClockFace.innerHTML = "23:59:59 PM"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
myClockFace.innerHTML = "23:59:59 PM";
```

```

If you refresh your webpage, you should get the time "23:59:59 PM" instead,
the horrible hour at which HW are due.

We can also change the style of the elements:

```js
myButton.style.color = "red";
myButton.style.fontSize = "2em";
```

> Note: `em` is a size unit, where `1em` equals the default font size. So `2em` means twice as big as the default.

### A little detour: how are colors represented in a computer?

Uptil now, we have been using the color nouns like "red", "blue", and

> "green". There can't be possibly enough words to describe every single color.

Author: Let's use some other colors so we don't give out the answer to RGB

Even if we do, we can't remember them. How does computer handles them then?

You might know what RGB stands for: ~~Ridiculously
Gigantic Baguette~~
<span style="background: #ff000084;">Red </span>
<span style="background: #00ff0084;">Green </span>

> <span style="background: #0000ff84;">Blue</span>.

Author: style is not rendered in github markdown. remove this

Reviewer 2: Uh is this even valid CSS? You have 4 bytes.

Author: the 4th byte is opacity right? But since GitHub doesn't render it, I will remove it.

> <span style="background: #0000ff84;">Blue</span>.

Reviewer 2: Also delete the space before `</span>`.

> Different amount of these 3 colors mixed together give you any color.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Different amounts of these 3 colors mixed together give you any color.
```

In computer we represent RGB as 3 numbers ranging from 0 to 255. In
hexadecimal (base 16), the range is from 00 to ff. Therefore, colors
in CSS can also be written in 6 characters:

```
red   = #ff0000
green = #00ff00
blue  = #0000ff

> cyan  = #00ffff

Author: the connection between number position and color is a bit lost here. Perhaps an image like:

|red|green|blue|
|-|-|-|
|ff |  ff  |  ff  |

would help

Reviewer 2: RR GG BB

```

Use a [color picker](https://www.google.com/search?q=color+picker) to pick
the exact color that you want!

Now we know that we can express colors in hex code, let's change the
background color of our entire webpage.

```js
body.style.backgroundColor = "#ffb1b1";
```

> 🚩 Checkpoint: You should be able to change the CSS style of elements using

> JavaScript.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> JavaScript.
```

### Scheduling for things to happen

We want our clock to tick. Let's first write a function to change
the clock face:

```js
const tick = () => {
    const date = new Date();
    const time = date.toLocaleTimeString('en-US');
    myClockFace.innerHTML = time;
};
```

- `new Date()` creates a new object representing the current date and time.

> Try printing it out.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  Try printing it out with `console.log`.
```

> - the date object has a method called `toLocaleTimeString` which formats the
> time into a string according to a given locale (a language and a place). The
> US format is "00:00:00 AM".

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- the date object has a method called `toLocaleTimeString` which formats the
  time into a string according to a given locale (a language and a place, like `en-US`).
  The default American English format is generally "00:00:00 AM".
```

> A method we can use is `setInterval`. It takes in a function and a time. It

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To make this function actually run every second, we can use `setInterval`. It takes in a function and a time interval, and
```

schedules a call to that function with the frequency given by that time. 
For example:

```js
// call the tick function every 1000 ms
setInterval(tick, 1000);
```

> This is going to call our tick function every 1000 milliseconds, or every 1 second. Therefore, our webpage behaves like a clock.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is going to call our tick function every 1000 milliseconds, or every 1 second. Our webpage now behaves like a clock.
```

> 🚩 Checkpoint: Your webpage should be able to function like a clock now.

### Listening and reacting to events

> A user can sometimes interact with a webpage, by clicking around for example.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A user can sometimes interact with a webpage, for example by clicking on hyperlinks.
```

> HTML also contains elements like `button` that is used for interactions. But
> we haven't been able to react to user interactions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
HTML also contains elements like `button` designed for rich user interactions, but thus far
we haven't yet made it react to stimuli.
```

In JavaScript, user interactions are represented as events. For instance, if
user press a button, it is called a "click" event. JavaScript listens for
these events, and when the events fire, they trigger a function call.

> Let's suppose that we want to change the background color of our background

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's suppose that we want to change our background color to some other color 
when the button is pressed.
```

purple!

> 🚩 Checkpoint: Pressing the button should change the background color of your webpage

## Summary

Today, we learned:
- what the DOM is
- how to access elements with `querySelector`
- how to manipulate elements
- how to schedule function calls regularly with `setInterval`
- how to listen for events with `addEventListener`

You have learned so much just by building a clock with JavaScript + DOM.
You can find the complete code in the [demo-product folder](/demo-product)
if you need some references.

## ⚡️ Challenges

Here are some challenges for you. 

<!-- omit in toc -->
### Challenge 1: our clock doesn't start right

When we open or refresh our page, our clock doesn't start with the right
time. There seems to be a one-second delay before our clock gets updated.
How do we solve that problem?

<!-- omit in toc -->
### Challenge 2: go crazy with the clock

Our clock is boring, can we make it such that when the clock ticks, we get a different background color (maybe a random number generator can help)?

But at the same time we want to clock to be normal when people's around so
they don't think we are crazy. Can we change the button such that it sets the

> background to white, and the color shouldn't change on tick. We can this

Reviewer: ```suggestion
background to white, and the color shouldn't change on tick. We call this
```
